---
id: 143d3176-005d-807a-babf-ffb5ba911af1
layout: post
date: 2024-11-19
title: MA2008B Linear Algebra I Lecture Note 16
subtitle: 
comments: false
leftToc: false
rightToc: false
sagecell: 
tags: [EMI,MA2007B,linear algebra,overview]
categories: [post]

---

**Theorem.** Let W be a subspace of a vector space V. Assume dim(V) is n. Then, dim(W)≤n. Moreover, if dim(W)=n, then V=W. 


**proof.** We may construct a basis for $W$ using the same process as we construct a basis for $V$. This process must halt when the set has $n$ elements. Therefore, the dimension of $W$ must be less than or equal to that of $V$. The key lemma shows that any linearly independent set with $\dim(V)$ elements generates $V$, so if $\dim(W)=n$, then $V=W$.


---


**Theorem.** Let $W_1$, $W_2$ be subspace of a vector space $V$. Assume $V$ is finite dimensional. Then, we have


$$
\text{dim}(W_1+W_2)=\text{dim}(W_1)+\dim(W_2)-\dim(W_1\cap W_2).
$$


**proof.** Let $\beta$ be a basis for $W_1\cap W_2$. By the Lemma, we know that we can find $S_1$ such that $S_1\cup \beta$, denoted by $\beta_1$, is a basis for $W_1$, and similarly, we have a set $S_2$ such that $\beta_2$ is a basis for $W_2$. Let


$$
\begin{align*}
S_1&=\set{u_1,\ldots,u_m}\\\\
S_2&=\set{v_1,\ldots,v_n}\\\\
\beta&=\set{w_1,\ldots,w_o}.
\end{align*}
$$


We claim $S_1\cup S_2\cup \beta$ is a basis for $W_1+W_2$. First, this is a generating set for sure, and we left the details for readers. We have to show this is a linearly independent set. Write $x\in W_1+W_2$ as a linear combination of $S_1\cup S_2\cup \beta$, 


$$
x=a_1u_1+\cdots +a_mu_m+b_1v_1+\cdots +b_nv_n + c_1w_1+\cdots +c_ow_o
$$


We may write $x$ as $v+u+w$ where


$$
\begin{align*}
v&=a_1v_1+\cdots+a_nv_n\\\\
u&=b_1u_1+\cdots+b_mu_m\\\\
w&=c_1w_1+\cdots+c_ow_o.
\end{align*}
$$


To show that $S_1\cup S_2\cup\beta$ is linearly independent, we assume $v=0$. Equivalently, we have $v=-u-w$. On the left hand side of the last equation, the vector is in $W_1$, and on the other side, it shows that the vector is in $W_2$. Therefore, $v$ is in $W_1\cap W_2$. However, $v$ is generated by elements not in $W_1$ and $W_2$, so the only possibility is that $v$ is a zero vector. Similar argument may apply to $u$. Therefore, we have $0=w$. However, $w$ is written as the linear combination of a basis for $W_1\cap W_2$. It follows immediately that $w$ is also a zero vector. This shows that $S_1\cup S_2\cup \beta$ is linearly independent. Thus, it forms a basis for $W_1+W_2$. 


The rest of the proof is simply counting the number of vectors in the basis.


---


**Corollary.** Let V be a finite dimensional vector space. If $V=W_1\oplus W_2$, then $\dim(V)=\dim(W_1)+\dim(W_2)$


**Proof.** By the definition of direct sum, the conclusion follows immediately.


---


# Linear Transformation


> **Definition.** Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces. Let $T:V\to W$ be a map. We say $T$ is linear or call $T$ a linear transformation if $T$ satisfies the following two conditions: for $x$, $x_1$, and $x_2$ in $V$ and $c\in F$,  
>  1. $T(x_1+x_2)=T(x_1)+T(x_2)$;  
>  2. $T(cx)=cT(x).$ 


To verify that a map between vector spaces is a linear transformation, we need to show that it satisfies the two conditions given in the definition. We use the following examples to demonstrate.


**Example.** We define the projection map $\text{proj}:\mathbb{R}^3\to \mathbb{R}$ by $\text{proj}((x,y,z))=x$. The projection map is linear since we have


$$
\begin{align*}
\text{proj}((x,y,z)+(x',y',z'))&=\text{proj}((x+x',y+y',z+z'))\\\\
&=x+x'=\text{proj}((x,y,z))+\text{proj}((x',y',z'))
\end{align*}
$$


and, for $c\in\mathbb{R}$, 


$$
\text{proj}(c(x,y,z))=\text{proj}((cx,cy,cz))=cx=c\text{proj}((x,y,z)).
$$


**Example.** In Calculus or any course in Analysis, we must prove that


$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial x}:\mathcal{F}^1(\mathbb{R})\to\mathcal{F}^0(\mathbb{R})\quad\text{and}\quad\int_0^t\cdot dx:\mathcal{F}^0(\mathbb{R})\to\mathcal{F}^1(\mathbb{R})
$$


are linear. Furthermore, these two operations are inverse to each other. This is known as the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus.


**Example.** $T((a_1,a_2))=(2a_1+a_2,a_1)$ is a linear transformation on $\mathbb{R}^2$. We may check:


$$
\begin{align*}
T((a_1,a_2)+(b_1,b_2))&=T((a_1+b_1,a_2+b_2))\\\\&=(2(a_1+b_1)+(a_2+b_2),a_1+b_1)\\\\&=(2a_1+a_2,a_1)+(2b_1+b_2,b_1)\\\\
&=T((a_1,a_2))+T((b_1,b_2))
\end{align*}
$$


and, for $c\in \mathbb{R}$, $T(c(a_1,a_2))=T((ca_1,a_2))=(2ca_1+ca_2,ca_1)=c(2a_1+a_2,a_1)=cT((a_1,a_2))$. We should note that this map is equivalent to multiplying the matrix


$$
\begin{bmatrix}
2 & 1\\\\
1 & 0
\end{bmatrix}
$$


by the column vector $\begin{bmatrix}a_1\\\\a_2\end{bmatrix}$. To conclude our introduction to linear transformations, let us consider a fundamental question:


Can we represent any linear transformation between finite-dimensional vector spaces as a matrix?


## Two key subspaces regarding a linear transformation


Let $T:V\to W$. One of the subspace is obvious and easy to justify the motivation. It is the range (or image) of $T$, denoted as $T(V)$. 


**Lemma.** $T(V)$ is a subspace of $W$.


**proof.** (Exercise)


Another subspace, belonging to $V$, is hidden but plays a significant role in Linear Algebra. We already seen it several time when we talk about the solution space of a differential equation.


**Recall**. The solution set of a linear equation system $Ax=0$ forms a subspace.


Here we will show you that this is generally right.


**Lemma.** The solution set of $T(v)=0$ forms a subspace of V.


**proof.** (Exercise)


**Definition.** Let $V$ and $W$ be vector spaces, and let $T:V\to W$ be linear. We define the null space (or kernel) $N(T)$ of $T$ to be the set of all vectors $x$ in $V$ such that $T(x)=0$; I.e., $N(T)=\set{x\in V|T(x)=0}$.


We define the range (or image) $R(T)$ to be the subset of $W$ consisting of all images (under $T$) of elements of $V$; i.e., $R(T)=\set{T(x)|x\in V}$.


If $N(T)$ and $R(T)$ are finite-dimensional, then we define the nullity of $T$, denoted as $\text{nullity}(T)$, and the rank of $T$, denoted as $\text{rank}(T)$, to be the dimensions of $N(T)$ and $R(T)$, respectively.


### 

